**UNIVERSITY OF MORATUWA**

![](media/image1.png){width="3.0104166666666665in"
height="3.2111111111111112in"}

**DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS AND TELECOMMUNICATION**

**EN2560 -- INTERNET OF THINGS DESIGN AND COMPETITION**

PROJECT REPORT

**Indoor Positioning with BLE beacons using triangulation**

**Problem intended to be solved**

In presence-based automation systems, there is little intelligence of
the actual position of the user by the system. The proximity based BLE
beacons fails to accommodate scenarios where the user is not very close
to the system. We intend to solve this problem by using 3 BLE beacon
scanners. With the proposed system it is desired to achieve positioning
even at areas where it is impossible to plant a BLE beacon or a scanner.

**System overview**

![](media/image2.png){width="7.489583333333333in" height="3.5625in"}The
designed system consists of 3 ESP32 modules working in BT + WiFi dual
mode. The user must have a beaconing device when he enters the room.
This is achieved by using a generic app in Playstore. We have used
iBeacons in the implemented system.

![](media/image3.jpeg){width="2.1368055555555556in"
height="3.2708333333333335in"}![](media/image4.jpeg){width="2.0833333333333335in"
height="3.171527777777778in"}The UUIDs of the beacons are used to
identify a known user. When a known beacon is received by any of the
beacon scanners, they publish the UUID and the Received Signal Strength
Indication value along with the scanner ID to a specific topic on MQTT
broker running on the RaspberryPi. The published data from all three
beacon scanners is processed by a Node Red flow which is also hosted on
the RaspberryPi. The relevant decisions are taken according to the data
and the two lights are turned on accordingly.

Furthermore, the system integrates a weather API to support the decision
making. One of the lights will only turn on after a previously set time
of the day. The Node-Red dashboard is used for this purpose and other
important data are also displayed on the Node Red dashboard.

The designed system is intended to identify three positions inside the
room distinctively.

**System operation**

User with a beacon enabled smart device enters the room. The RSSI values
corresponding to the UUID of the device is sent to the Node Red flow. It
identifies whether the user is inside the room or not using the RSSI
values of the received beacons and operates the lights accordingly.

The RSSI values depends heavily on the device being used. Hence
initially a calibration process is carried out. User must use the
"Calibration" tab of the MQTT dashboard and select his device and the
position he intends to calibrate, and then start the calibration by
clicking the button. He and the device should be stationary during this
process. The Node-Red flow stores the corresponding RSSI values in
**text files** on RaspberryPi local storage. Hence this calibration is
only needed to be carried out once, the data is preserved even with
system restarts.

After calibration, the flow reads in the data from the files. The
current RSSI values from a specific device is continuously checked with
the previously calibrated data to identify the current position of the
user. The detected position is displayed in the Node Red dashboard as
well.

If the user is inside the room & the set time has passed or user is in a
specified position the lights will turn on. This is achieved by using
two ESP8266 Node MCUs which are also subscribed to the same MQTT broker
on different topics. A relay module is used to handle high currents.

**Implementation**

![](media/image5.png){width="4.625in"
height="2.2276137357830272in"}***ESP32 modules:*** (Kolban, 2018)

Three ESP32 modules are used in dual mode. They all support Bluetooth
4.2 BLE beacon scans. They are connected to a WiFi access point, MQTT
protocol is used to transfer data to the Node Red flow. Since MQTT
broker, Node Red are all hosted on a local RaspberryPi server no
internet connectivity is required. (Spiess, BLE Human Presence Detector
using an ESP32 (Tutorial, Arduino IDE), 2017)

*Power consumption considerations*

Despite the fact that the beacon scanners are unable to operate on
batteries due to their high-power consumption, efforts were put to
minimize the amount. Without these optimizations an ESP32 consumed
around 150mA when idle, \~300mA current spikes when booting, scanning
and publishing. Since the computations are minimal, we have reduced the
core clock speed down to 80MHz, furthermore we tried ESP32 deep sleep
mode in order to turn off the modules when no beacons are in range.
However, they periodically boot up and scan for any beacons before going
back to deep sleep again. After the optimizations the power consumption
went down to \~50mA when idle, 140mA when scanning. During deep sleep
\~11mA was used, this is mainly due to the quiescent current

![](media/image6.png){width="3.4965277777777777in"
height="0.35in"}![](media/image7.png){width="4.833333333333333in"
height="0.4166666666666667in"}of the onboard regulator (AMS 1117 3.3V)
and the LED. Deep sleep was achieved by calling the
esp_deep_sleep_start(); function. (Spiess, ESP32 Deep Sleep, RTC Memory,
\"Secret\" LoLin Pins, 2017)

During the deep sleep all the variables will be lost except the data
stored in the RTC memory (Real Time Clock), which is 8kB, plenty for our
usage. The variables could be stored in RTC memory by simply adding
"RTC_DATA_ATTR" macro in front of the variable declaration.

![](media/image8.png){width="3.7697976815398073in"
height="0.8645833333333334in"}

***Program flow ESP32***

![](media/image9.png){width="3.082638888888889in" height="5.7in"}The
ESP32 publishes to the "fromDEV{scanner ID}" topic. For example, the
scanner 1 publishes to the "fromDEV1" topic. The PubSubClient library
only supports QoS levels 0 and 1. However our attempts to use QoS 1 was
not successful, furthermore it does not support persistent messages. For
security purposes we set up our MQTT broker to allow user logins.
(O'Leary, 2020)

![](media/image10.png){width="4.334027777777778in"
height="0.18333333333333332in"}![](media/image11.png){width="4.666666666666667in"
height="0.36455489938757657in"}

Since we are using deep sleep power mode, a different approach must be
taken in the program. Only the void setup() is used, each time the ESP
boots up from the deep sleep the setup() function is executed, hence the
void loop() is left empty.

**Active scanning** is used in BLE, the scanning period is set to 5
secs, scan interval is set to 300ms and scan window is set to 100%
(300ms) of scan interval for maximum detection.

To reduce the effect of noise RSSI values from 8 packets from a device
is averaged and published to the MQTT broker.

Each detected beacon packet (Advertisement) will call the callback
function defined in pBLEScan-\> setAdvertisedDeviceCallbacks(). Two
arrays are updated inside the BLE callback function with the beacon
data.

![](media/image12.png){width="3.8in" height="1.1666240157480314in"}

***ESP8266 Node MCU relay modules and light***

Two Node MCU modules are used in the implementation. They both subscribe
to two different topics on the MQTT broker. If the command to turn on
the light is received, they will turn on the respective relay by using
GPIO 5 pin.

Furthermore, to override the system's operation, user can connect to the
NodeMCU's hosted web server using its IP address and use the links.

***Node Red Flow***

The MQTT messages are first categorized based on the User device and
scanner IDs, creating global variables containing each user device's
RSSI signal strength from three scanners. The developed system can
support up to three user devices. UUIDs are used in this categorization.
After this phase, the RSSI values for each device are continuously
compared with the calibrated values which were obtained from the files
on the local storage of RaspberryPi. (Cope, 2018)

![](media/image13.png){width="3.5166666666666666in"
height="2.723611111111111in"}The categorize function further reduces the
effect of noise by using a median filter. Each time a message arrives
from any of the three scanners the function stores the received value on
a stack and when the stack reaches the length of 5, it is sorted, and
its middle value used for the rest of the program.

**System functionality achieved**

The intended functionality of the system was achieved. When the user is
inside the room first bulb was turned on, when the user was moved to a
pre calibrated position the second light was turned on.

![](media/image14.png){width="7.5in"
height="1.7291666666666667in"}However, the functionality was not robust,
there were some occurrences of false detections. The calibration process
had to done repeatedly to achieve good performance. Furthermore, some
devices showed very good signal transmission strengths leading to being
unable to detect the device is out of the room. We suspect this is
mainly due to the implemented indoor area was being very spatial.

![](media/image15.png){width="3.6416666666666666in"
height="2.3159722222222223in"}![](media/image16.png){width="3.4916666666666667in"
height="2.5694444444444446in"}

References
==========

Cope, S. (2018, May 21). *Read and Write Data To a File In Node-Red*.
Retrieved from Youtube:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bI0bQ7pO1kA&tKolban, N. (2018).
*Kolban\'s Book on ESP32.* Texas US.Node-RED. (n.d.). *Node Red
Documentation*. Retrieved from https://nodered.org/docs/O'Leary, N.
(2020, 5 20). *Arduino Client for MQTT Documentation*. Retrieved from
Arduino Client for MQTT: https://pubsubclient.knolleary.net/apiSpiess,
A. (2017, December 31). *BLE Human Presence Detector using an ESP32
(Tutorial, Arduino IDE)*. Retrieved from Youtube:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KNoFdKgvskUSpiess, A. (2017, July 30).
*ESP32 Deep Sleep, RTC Memory, \"Secret\" LoLin Pins*. Retrieved from
Youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r75MrWIVIw4
